Right everyone.
Very good to, um, rejoin you and see you. Right.
We've got a couple of submissions to start with.
Um, the first person we've got here on our list is, um,
peace Action Wellington.
And I presume, is that you Valerie? Can I share
Kiata? Good morning. Yes, it
is me.
Can I just check in who it,
who from the committee is actually there today?
Well, I think the entire committee's there.
Great. Yeah. Yeah. So there's a cohort of us here.
Valerie, in in person. Yeah.
You might not be able to see on the camera, but,
Okay. So we
vale you've got, um, we've given you, uh,
10 minutes, so, um, leave time for questions, please.
That'd be great.
Goodo. Great. Thank you very much.
I appreciate your time this morning.
There's just really three things I
wanna talk to the committee about.
First of all, um, this bill is an attack on free speech.
This government says that it cares about free speech.
In particular, the ACT Party has been a leading campaigner
against hate speech laws.
I dare say that if the labor government had attempted
to pass this law three years ago,
there would've been a very loud act led opposition to it.
Act would say that limits on free speech must only be
that which are absolutely necessary in a free
and democratic society.
Yet funnily enough, these absolutely necessary limitations
conveniently align with the government's agenda on gang
patches, foreign interference, and in this case protest.
But such limitations are an unbearable
outreach akin to fascism.
When what is in question are the rights of people not
to be subjected to endless, violent, racist hate,
homophobia and misogyny.
True believers in free speech shouldn't fall back on
legislation to silence their political opponents under the
guise of protecting privacy
when it is politically convenient.
I wanna provide you a real life example of
how this will actually silence people.
Over the past three years in Wellington, we have had dozens
of demonstrations outside the Iranian embassy.
And Tai, this is an ordinary residence on an ordinary
residential street.
These protests have been noisy, they have been inconvenient,
they have been disruptive.
They have stood against the repressive theocratic Iranian
regime and its murdering of political dissidents.
These have been led by the Iranian New Zealand community,
people who have fled to come here
where they hope their right to freedom
of speech is protected.
Yet it is this very community
that would be dissuaded from protesting by this
who are already fearful of state forces
and who would likely not go there if they thought they might
be summarily arrested without even a
warning for holding a protest.
This limitation on free speech is not reasonable
and is proportionate
and it should not be excused by those
who claim to fight for free.
Speech Number two, this bill is open to the worst kind
of arbitrary state overreach.
This bill is set up for arbitrary and
therefore unjust application by the police.
What might be okay in Central Auckland on 9:00 PM on a
Tuesday night would be very different to
what is okay in dip in at 9:00 PM on a Tuesday night.
Indeed, what might be okay to one police sergeant
one day might not be okay to one another on the next.
So instead of providing clarity
and uniformity to police,
this introduces deliberate arbitrariness and to the law.
Instead of having the confidence in and z Bora
and the police, the government is seeking to legislate when,
as I note in my submission, police already have a range
of tools including arresting people for breach of the peace.
Police are being asked to apply a complicated legal test
and balancing act while out on the streets, out on the beat
to decide what is unreasonable in truth.
It is not reasonable to ask them to do so.
I should know, I went through the district court,
the high court, the Court of Appeal
and the Supreme Court over a period of four years
to establish the important free speech precedent
in Morse versus police.
The highest court in the land with the benefit of facts
and evidence decided what was reasonable,
what was offensive, and what was disorderly.
It is also completely unreasonable to have no trigger
for arrest in this law.
It is unreasonable to have roadworks
outside your house at 6:00 AM
but do police come and arrest the road workers?
No. An atheist would see the singing
of Christmas carols on Christmas Eve
outside his house as unreasonable.
But do we arrest carolers instead
of simply asking them to leave?
And your next door neighbor's, 21st party
with 200 people in a live band all day
on Sunday is unreasonable.
But does team policing roll in and start mass arrests? No.
So why does political speech have a lower threshold
and a lower tolerance than anything else?
This is finally, this is unnecessary and
therefore bad lawmaking.
The National Party says that since 1938, quote,
our values have not just been words on a page.
One of those values you say is quote limited government.
Yet here you are passing laws
because something that rarely happens has disturbed Erica
Stanford and Winston Peters.
The regulatory impact statement gives no the government
no legs to stand on.
It makes clear that this law has very marginal effect.
So the question must be why pass it?
This is ironically the kind of nanny state intervention
and unnecessary growth of lawmaking
that this government has often
accused its opposition of doing.
It is virtue signaling pure and simple.
Conservatives have historically
and rightly been weary of unnecessary law lawmaking,
and I would wager that none of you have ever had a protest
outside of your house, nor will you.
Yes, there are occasional protest outside MPS homes
and those of others that has been the case for national
and labor led governments for at least 10 years.
I have been protesting myself for about 35 years,
and I can count on one hand the number of times I've been
to a private residence to protest.
I'd say to Mr. Stevenson from the ACT Party.
In your maiden speech to parliament, you said the role
of the state should be limited.
That is in keeping with classical liberal ideas.
People can and should be able
to express themselves even when it is inconvenient,
offensive and disruptive to others.
Do you actually believe in free speech
or is it simply a weapon with which
to bash the less powerful in society?
Human rights prevent the state from acting
or interfering with your freedom, any interference
to which you do not consent as an act of aggression.
And it is therefore ieg legitimate
unless there is an equally strong compelling right.
Otherwise, this law does not meet that test by a long shot.
In the past, members
of the Act party like Rodney Hyde have had the courage
of their conviction
to stand against attacks on our rights like
the Terrorism Suppression Act.
So I asked the Act party,
will you stand against this attack on free speech?
Finally, the diminution
of the love liberty is the very aim of this bill.
For those who are, who care about freedom and rights.
The response to this bill must be no.
So, and thanks for your time.
Alright, we've got about two, two minutes or so.
Who would like a question?
Tom? Yeah, Tom? Yeah. Good.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair. Thank
you Valerie, for your submission.
My question is, what about the wider impacts on not
necessarily the people's properties,
but the rest of the community, their neighbors, uh, people
with young children, people with animals.
Um, what about the wider impacts for those people who,
who haven't made a choice to run for public office,
didn't sign up to it, didn't expect
that in their private residence,
that they would have the disturbance
of the peace happening right outside their front
Door? Well, I, I guess what I
would say is this, this bill in,
in the first instance doesn't particularly target that.
Um, but, but police do have very adequate tools already
to deal with, um, disturbances of the peace.
I mean, the police have the right to arrest people literally
for disturbing the peace.
Um, there are a number of noise, uh, limitations without,
with around cities and municipalities
and, um, that allow the police to deal with disturbances.
So we have to understand that protest
by its very nature tends to be disturbing,
but that is part of a free and democratic society.
And it is, it is difficult to deal with for sure,
but that doesn't mean that we should shut it down.
Um, I, I guess that's, that's the point,
is we live in a society with their, with a number
of tensions that are there.
And police absolutely have the right people have the right
to trespass people off their property if they don't like it.
People have the right to enforce that
and to, to ensure that people can,
can be arrested if they violate that.
Um, as I mentioned, there are noise.
There are noise, um, limitations in place.
So if, if people want
to see greater limitations on people being able
to have noise in their community, well then absolutely.
But if we're talking about just simply shutting down
democratic descent, then I think we need to be really,
really careful about that
because it singles out political activity as a disturbance
that's somehow different from any other kind of disturbance
that is uniquely offensive to people.
And I just think that is wrong.
Like I, my examples point out,
it's like I find a number of things disturbing.
I find roadworks, uh, uh,
disturbing at six o'clock in the morning.
But does, does that mean that road work shouldn't happen
or that, you know, road workers should be arrested?
No. It, it means I need, I have to put up with that.
And frankly, in our society, we have to have a degree
of tolerance for that kind of stuff.
And I think that, that, that level already exists
and police powers already, um,
are sufficient to deal with that.
Mr. Chair. Alright. Hey,
thank you very much for your submission.
That was, um, very interesting. Right. Thank you. Thank you.
We're gonna go to, uh, Corina. Um, no, no.
We're, we're time noises. Noise.
Um, we're going to go to the next one,
which is a disturbance.
Is disturbance. Right.
Moving to the next submission, please. Um, uh, Ms.
Corina Brown.
Uh, yeah, I, I'm Corina Brown.
Uh, I have the strategic researcher for,
We've got 10 minutes with you, Trina. Alright, cool Kia.
Thank you. Yeah, so I'm working on the assumption
that you have read my submission so
therefore that, um, I'm not going to, uh, reiterate it.
Um, what I'm going to bring in is just a couple of examples
of where I think it could cause problems, especially for,
for us as a union.
Um, the first one is that we actually, um,
have residential houses, um, where the, uh, employer
is actually based in the residential area.
Um, and we under this legislation would not be able
to actually protest outside that employer.
Um, even though, uh, we have done it in the past.
Um, and often have the residents come out with us
to join us in the protest when they're actually, uh,
fighting for health and safety for the rights
of the workers within that residential home.
And we find that, you know, that is a, a good way
to actually raise the issues of health
and safety net is to actually protest
and actually have the residents part of it.
Um, but this legislation would not allow this to occur.
Um, another issue for us, especially in um, home
and support is that a lot
of the employers actually have their registered home,
their registered company address as a home.
'cause they don't actually have a commercial president, um,
property because they actually are mostly in the gig
community because they're actually working remotely
and they, we have no other way
to actually do illegitimate right of protest.
Um, and we are really concerned
and the fact is that under this legislation they could then
say they're being targeted
unfairly 'cause it's their residence.
So we actually would be, we lose our right under the Bill
of Rights to actually have a peaceful protest, um,
without disruption.
Um, and our real concern is the fact is
that it's not really, when it talks about being
disruptive, it's not defined.
And so it's up to subjective decision making as to
what is disruptive.
So the police then would've to make that decision.
And if they can't make that decision
or if they, they're concerned about whether it is or not
and is, and there's some gray area to it,
then the default's going to be to arrest
and actually let the courts decide.
Because in the, in the legislation that's
what you've basically said, that the courts will make the
final decision as to whether
or not the protest will be disruptive
and that will actually be timely and costly
and actually will put a barrier to people's right
to actually peacefully protest.
I understand the intent of what you're trying to do,
but I think this legislation is just too broad
to actually meet the requirement of what you are wanting.
I mean, if you actually needed
to actually be target concerned about targeting of, um,
people in public office, then that should be,
it's in the legislation as to what's the,
what the legislation is for, for the moment.
It just covers anything. And that is a real concern to us
as we, it will actually impede in our ability
to actually do peaceful protests for those employers
who actually work from a residential home
or who actually have their residential home
as their company address, um, where,
which is difficult for us.
So that's what I wanted to add to my submission.
Um, and left plenty of time for you to ask us questions.
Cool. Can I just ask you the first question?
You made the statement that, uh,
this bill would preclude you from doing any, um, protesting
outside someone's residential home.
Is that what you believe or, um,
or don't you think this bill has discretion on that?
As long as it's an orderly protest, uh, that is allowed.
It's not, it's just that it's unruly
or disorderly that it becomes
No, 'cause the reading doesn't say that.
The, the, the, the, the wording is that if the resident,
the person living at that residence feels
that they're being unfairly targeted,
that they can actually then,
then they can actually challenge it.
And of course the employer's gonna feel
that they're unfairly targeted.
So then it becomes a decision with the police.
But the bill requires, um, there's gotta be clarity
around, there's an intent to, uh, I think it's intimidate
or intent.
There's gotta be, you've gotta prove an intention.
So you can't, unless there's an intention,
a police has gotta be careful about it
'cause they're not going to unnecessarily, uh, pursue people
that, whereas you're assuming that they,
they will automatically jump to the conclusion
that any protest would mean that it was disorderly
or there's an intent and
therefore you'd be arrested if that was the case.
And Andrew, I think the word is directed at, so it has
to be directed at, um, the the public,
the normal person. Yeah.
And so, and that's what I was saying is that
of course we will be directing it at that employer.
We, it is permanently directed at who has,
who's the reason to that house.
That is the whole intent of what our protest would be.
And I said under this legislation our reading is the fact
that that actually would not,
that could actually then be challenged.
They could call the police, the police
would've to make a a call.
And if they weren't comfortable making a call,
then the only way they, they'd actually have to put it
to the courts to decide.
And there that would mean the fact that easiest way to do
that was to actually be arrest the people, give the notice
of trespass to actually,
and then let the court
decide whether they were right or not.
And that is where we feel that it becomes, it's too broad.
And those things like disruptive
and, um, intent aren't well-defined.
They're actually very loose comments
that could actually be interpreted
differently by different police.
You might have some police who are quite open
to it and others who are not.
It becomes the police's decision as
to whether we are actually being disruptive or not.
And that is where our concern is
because we, you'll never know for one day the next,
whether we are gonna take people there who's only gonna get
arrested and there'll be a fear to go,
Okay, I'm gonna turn to Ms. Walters,
Uh, thank you Mr.
Chair. Um, and I, I think you, you make
that point really well, um, Corina
that the issue is disruptive, so being disruptive
and in fact under the current law,
the police potentially could already, um,
move people on from a protest
because they're being disruptive
because they're breaching the piece.
The difference here, as you point out in your submission is
that there's a potential fine, um, going to court,
et cetera, whereas a breach of the peace is just an arrest
and move on provision.
So I think the problem here is
that the police do have already the powers to stop things
that are a breach of the piece,
but what's happening here is that they're proposing
to introduce penalties
and convictions on top of that as well.
Uh, do you see that as the, the gap here?
Definitely the gap and that's what the, our concern is.
And it, as I said, the the, it's too broad. Mm-hmm.
And, and when people aren't gonna want to be able
to have a fine, they aren't wanting him to go to court,
they don't wanna have to find that time
to actually have that concern.
Do I really want to do this protest
with this could be the outcome.
And that's the the point.
It's not that it may, it will be the outcome,
but that it might be the outcome
and it will actually create a barrier to people who making
that decision whether they will protest or not.
And I think it's putting an unfair, it's moving the, this,
this quilt talks about it's trying to actually be equal
between both the rights to protest
and the right of the individual.
But I really feel that this bill has flicked that
and made it the right of the individual
has the priority over the right
of the collective to protest.
And I really do have an issue with that
as does E two I should say.
Um, when I'm saying I am talking about E two as a, as a
as a union, uh, there was a real concern about that
because it will put barriers to people, especially,
you know, when we have low, low wage workers,
they're not gonna want to actually protest if there's a
possibility of a fine and they're quite big fines.
And it's not about the organization who's setting up the
protest, about being fined.
It's actually a fine
for the individuals if they're arrested.
And that where we have that real concern is
that it is putting up a big barrier that is trying
to fix a small problem has become a big wide bit
of legislation that's actually gonna
capture so many different people.
When if the issue is around people in public office be able
to feel safe in their homes
as away from their electorate offices,
then we should have legislation that deals with that
or ability to deal with that rather than this broad piece
of legislation that's stopping protests outside
by residential homes, which as I said, we,
which can be employers
and which can be in our cases, you know,
we actually have idea services homes and things like that.
We should have the ability to be
able to protest in front of.
Okay. Any other questions?
Um, Mr. Chair, just a quick question from me.
Karen, do you believe
that a person's home should be their sanctuary?
Well, it, I wish it could be,
but I mean like last, you know, for our animals
and like be sanctuary, but you know, fireworks for dw, um,
perhaps on our, um, on our animals, that's
what previous person was saying, you have
to look at the balance between what becomes your sanctuary
and what becomes the right.
Um, personally I love Diwali fireworks, you know, um,
and I really enjoyed watching them.
But then the fireworks afterwards, you know,
it was really unfair to our animals
and I felt frustrated when they're coming into our
property is that same concept.
I believe there should be a protection like,
like you were talking about for public office.
I think it was unfair what happened
and it's happened to other
mps as well, not just the last two.
And I think we need to look a way to deal with that,
but I don't think we should actually have such a broad bit
of legislation that actually takes,
puts the individual right ahead of anybody's ability
to protest and put such excessive fines and,
and the possibility of a record, criminal record.
Alright, just for protesting.
Hey, thanks Corina, nice to see you again.
Um, and thanks for your submission, right. Thank you much.
Now we've got Anne here
who should be there in person, hopefully.
Yep, I'm here.
Anne, we've got five minutes with you.
So, um, you've watched the drill so,
um, your floor is yours.
Thank you. I plan to use a couple of minutes speaking
to allow for questions.
Um, Morena,
I strongly recommend the demonstrations near residential
premises amendment to this bill be abandoned
because it has the potential to suppress protests
and any opposition to the government thus inciting fascism.
In addition, there are other laws which cover off
disturbances that this amendment claims to avert
the ambiguity in the word near has the potential
to halt all protests
as the previous speaker has highlighted.
Cities and town centers are ideal places for protests
to occur for ease of congregating
as transport leads to city centers.
Considering our cities are full of apartment living,
protestors would feel unsafe under this amendment
as they would fear arrest
as a pro-Palestine protester myself under this amendment.
I could be arrested. Ridiculous.
I know, but let's say I endure verbal abuse from a pass by.
This is a common occurrence.
And let's say this passed by lives nearby the bill's wording
and I say free Palestine
or let's comply with the Geneva Convention
and oppose genocide, yet potentially
I could be considered the harasser since I
would be part of a protest.
And we are near the said passes by residents, right?
The ambiguity of near is not a reasonable limitation.
In addition, other laws provide for arrest due
to disruptive behavior, which we all know about.
And this disruptive behavior could be in a protest or
otherwise this law change will not provide protection
for any members of the public
at any distance from their residence.
In summary, my three significant points are one,
what is near 10 meters,
a hundred meters or a kilometer.
Two, using an unreasonable limitation
to close down opposition
to this government's decision making is fascism
and needs to be stopped.
Other three other laws cover
what this bill purports to resolve.
Mr. Chair. Yeah, go for it.
Thanks Mr. Chair, uh, this morning
and we've heard a number of submitters try
and suggest things like roadworks
outside your house being the equivalent of protesting.
And I appreciate your right to protest, uh,
on whatever subject that you would like
outside my office or whatever.
And I've had circumstance where I've been walking
with my wife on an odd morning off with my child, um,
in a pram and had a protester talking about the subject, uh,
that you mentioned, um, asked me if I would be comfortable
with my child being killed.
Now that's in the general public in a park.
Can you explain to me why you think it would ever be
appropriate for that group to come up
and stand outside of our house
where my three kids are playing on the tramp in the front
lawn and shout such things, um, to us?
Well, I think the current environment is an appropriate
environment when on the world stage we have governments
supporting a genocide where children are killed
and people do need to be educated about this matter, whether
or not that um, person was part of a protest
or just on their own, they're just making a valid point
that it is time for this government to acknowledge
that there is a genocide, there is a state
that is being persecuted and it's time we stood up
and made that clear to the world that we
do not support genocide chair, we
Probably Mr. Chair. So, so
just to be a hundred percent clear, you,
what you've just said and said is appropriate
is it would be entirely appropriate for a group of people
to come up and stand outside my house, shout at us
with our kids on the tramp in the front lawn about them
being killed and that would be appropriate.
Well that, that, that was my question. And that's what
You agreed in that situation. And
it doesn't matter what someone was yelling at me,
you could ring the police
and ask for the people yelling at you
to be controlled undercurrent law. Thank
You. I think you've just a
why we need this law. Okay.
No, it's not why we need the law.
There are other laws that cover that off. Alright.
It's been noise control or abusive behavior.
It doesn't need to be anything to do
with being near your residence.
I'm apologizing. Sorry,
Mr. Chair Lawrence.
No, no, we, uh, we're finishing the,
we're out of time, but thank you Ms, here
for your presentation this morning.
I think that may be Mr. Marshall.
Is that Mr. Marshall behind you or
It Is. Can you come
forward, Mr. Marshall?
We've got five minutes with you as well. That'd be good.
Good to see you this morning. Thank you for attending.
Good Morning.
Uh, uh, Mr.
Chairman, members of the panel, thank you
for an opportunity to speak to you.
I don't want to repeat, uh, the, um,
obvious arguments against the bill
that other submitters have already made.
Uh, so I, I give the example of a university
who blocked the group from meeting on a balcony
under the pretense of fire safety regulations.
Law is, it is about, is
as much about application as it is context.
I'm committed to this ex this endeavor of liberal democracy.
So this concerns me and I hope you are concerned too.
So I want the state to not be a bad actor
do wrote a list of conditions for democracies for democracy
to, to flourish.
And one of them was, uh, weak, subcultural, plural, um,
pluralism in New Zealand.
We have a very dominant subcultural pluralism as Eastern
and others have commented on.
New Zealand has a, a very hollow character in terms
of civil institutions
and bodies to oppose this very, uh,
dominant subcultural pluralism. We have areas.
Mr. Marshall, can I just ask you,
can you be very explicit about what you mean by that
just to help everyone?
Well, um, uh, it pluralism is you have a state
and then you have, uh, which is a source of power
and then you have other entities in it.
So you could say that, um, this Weber said
that the state was, is meant to have
a monopoly over violence.
But there are other groups like, um, like gangs
where there's who use violence and,
and uh, operate outside the laws
and people are, uh, uh, victims
as well as perpetrators.
Um, so we have areas of public interests I describe
as pub public common, which can become taken over
by entities which are not subject to the same scrutiny
of public agencies.
Entities who private whose private interests are often a
conflict with the public interest.
This could not be more so seen than in the use
of community housing providers or chips.
Um, used by local councils over public housing. Sure.
All illegal with one
or two councilors on the board for parent's sake.
The ability to shed shield discretion on the board,
a virtual legal c castle siting terms such as privacy
and business sensitivity, show it as a language game
that anyone involved in the sector will know.
DOL mentions moral autonomy as one
of the 10 advantages
that democracies have over non um, democracies.
What is it like to live in a regime where your ability
to choose action and not choose action
and runs the risk of harm to you?
What happens to a society when society loses this ability
of moral autonomy?
Uh, we have the example of the, um, young, young, um, girl
who drowned in Targa and who, um, it was not, uh,
and who it was highlighted the proximity of many adults
who saw the un unconscious body, uh, the twisting
of emotions becomes a necessity to survive.
The kapos and the concentration camps are an example
of radicalized people towards a willingness to be violent
and extreme in their actions,
mapping self hatred onto other prisoners.
It is this loss of shared collective good
of society which has lost moral autonomy,
thriving back markets, domestic violence, alcoholism
and littering running rife, almost a normalized affair.
When you rob a person of moral autonomy,
you are inviting them to be more violent
where the extreme form of protest is found in workers touch,
take for instance of protest for of an airline technician
who finds expression for his, his, uh,
situation in an airline disaster.
I believe the mental health explanation is an
unsatisfactory explanation.
I argue that action is not hidden
and motives are accessible from behavior and action.
One example I offer is of the 2018 Horizon Air Bombardier
Q 400 incident.
I have no way of proving this causal link
between unexplainable and
and extreme action involving a person and personal motives.
While these are all events
of relative uni importance when seen in isolation
in the context of any legislation which could give the
oppression of reducing moral autonomy,
this is something I do not want.
Right. Hey, thank you very much
for your submission Mr. Marshall.
Unfortunately out of time,
but um, thank you for that submission this morning.
It's, uh, raises some interesting points, right?
Um, we've got Jean Olson by Zoom.
Jen, are you available?
I saw you, um, trying to get her on Zoom before.
Jen, if you are there, please um, join us.
Have we got, we've got the next person here,
um, Anna Briscoe.
Does, is Anna here by any chance? It's
Canceled. No, she's canceled.
She's canceled. Coming.
Yeah. Cool. Thank you.
Okay. Oh, thanks for that.
I'm, um, I'm having a little bit of difficulty
'cause I'm on the west coast and there's a power cut,
so I'm having to do this here.
Yeah. Um, so thanks.
I'm, I'm going to try and find my talk. Here we are.
Um, so yeah, called Jen Olson Ho.
I'm Jen Olson and I'm opposed to this bill.
Um, and I urge the committee to reject it
as not only unnecessary,
but a major threat to the right to protest
and also problematic for the police and courts.
Um, as I said in my written submission, the activities
that may disturb peace
and privacy are already sufficiently covered in, in law.
Um, and this bill represents a restriction on freedom
of speech as far as I'm concerned,
and the right to protest
by potentially criminalizing legitimate protest.
Um, and that is pointed out in the regulatory impact
statement by the Ministry of Justice, um,
that it may capture conduct
that is not traditionally subject to criminal sanction.
Um, I've been concerned about the lack of time allowed
for consultation on this bill.
There's been no adequate consultation with Maori,
with legal experts and with the public.
Um, and again, the impact statement points out
that there's very limited data on the number
and impact of the type of demonstrations
that would fall into this, this category of offense.
Um, so there's very little data on the need for the bill
or the problems associated with enforcing it.
Um, and I, I think
that it would place police officers in a very difficult
situation of having to interpret difficult, having
to interpret vague definitions of disruption
and newness, um, during possibly volatile events, you know,
leading to the potential for discriminatory
and inconsistent decision making.
Police do have a very complex job, um,
and the legislation that they enforce needs to be robust.
Um, and this is not it, it is, there are too many vague
criteria there that really put police officers at risk
of error or even exacerbating a difficult situation.
Um, being able to arrest without a previous warning,
you know, is, is a, um, yeah,
is is giving the police a degree
of responsibility without a safety, um,
which is very difficult.
And the penalties that can be imposed three months in prison
or $2,000 fine, they're very severe considering
that people may not even be aware
that they're breaking the law.
So, and again, the criteria for courts
to decide whether the demonstration is unreasonable
or not are also vague
and it's impossible to be certain
what would be considered against the law without
lengthy argument.
Um, which could just tie up the courts
and compared with present legislation,
which can be used very effectively.
So, um, the definition of residential premises,
as somebody else just pointed out, is, is very vague
and it could be spread to almost anywhere
that would normally be considered appropriate for a scene
of a, a protest like an embassy,
for example, or the streets.
So I believe the right
to protest is a vital pillar of our democracy.
And because this bill risks criminalizing legitimate
protest, it will have a chilling effect on protest overall,
which is an attack on a healthy democracy.
Protest has been the catalyst
for social development many times throughout the history
of Artie r New Zealand.
And the right to protest must be protected.
Public pressure has given us many examples of success
after initial opposition and,
and we've shown ourselves to be on the right side of history
opposing apartheid and, and opposing nuclear testing.
Any government facing public protests should ask itself
what is happening in society to provoke this dissatisfaction
and how this can be addressed.
The climate, crisis, poverty, low pay, poor services,
they're all cause of protest
and they should be taken seriously.
Criminalizing protest is not a responsible solution
and it will not provide answers to the problems faced
by protestors.
Protest draws attention to the needs of communities
and societies and criminalizing protests is a sign
that a government is not taking responsibility
for meeting those needs.
So I'm asking you please to reject this bill. Thank you.
Well, thank you Jean,
and I'm glad you joined us from the west coast.
Is it fruitful down there?
It's raining, but it's actually quite warm.
I, I am from Otta Porte, uh, Dunedin.
Um, and it's warmer over here, but definitely wetter.
Right. Thanks.
Um, thank you for your submission this morning.
We've run out of time, unfortunately,
but hey, really appreciate you joining
us and making that effort.
Well, you are welcome. Thank you.
Okay, thank, thank you everyone.
Um, now we're just going back into private for a second
and then we'll, um, you're about to get into the house.
Okay. All.